And then I guess people can, you know, use the the hand raising feature, and I can, you know, call on people, they think.
And we'll go from there. So, I think let's, let's get it started. Because although we're missing.
All right, and then I get we get the jingle as well.
Okay, and that the first step is Andrew demerge yet.
So you can just take it away Andrew in the nice schedule. Yeah.
Okay.
Let me just get my.
Okay. Is it okay if I share my screen. Oh please do.
Okay.
Okay, so today I'm going to be talking about reverb My name is Andrew merchant, and I teach at Humber College and an artist and work with computational poetry, but today we're going to be talking about Weaver, and either this part of yellows emerging
spaces for email creations initiative.
for email creations initiative. So this was something that we were really, really excited about and the editorial board consists of myself john barber Jeremy height Dahlia I'll say it in hand away.
And what reserve is audio augmented reality scene, dedicated to spatially conceived creative literary projects.
And so, the scene is a, it's a mobile app where livery Sonic artworks are publicly available and written specifically for locations, determined by the writers and artists.
And it's across the globe.
We explore the aesthetic possibilities of sonically delivered literature that engages with the physical experience of the environment.
Part of the motivation for this project was, you know, in thinking about public space in digital space and how it's been increasingly kind of under surveillance.
and unsustainable vision of neoliberal power, and its dominance over public space, and also mental space. And so we're interested in trying to construct a platform that lets allows people to kind of engage in that in interested in that.
I'm creating a platform to highlight work that connects important literary traditions that engage with the human voice or non human voice I should add with the importance of writing for people in specific physical spaces.
So quick word about our partner just so is helping to make this all happen and there, the mobile app that we're using for audio and your, and they've collaborated with lots of great museums in New York City and you know all over, and lots of different
arts institutions, so we're really happy to be working with them and not having to create all the code ourselves because we all do that. Enough have in our own work.
Um, so the thing that we're announcing here at yellow is our call for proposals for our inaugural sheet.
And we, what we really are interested in is we want to expand the reach of unit to connect with creative communities, and kind of like minded artists who work with, you know like, people that are working with text in place from the art field are emerging
and get practitioner and doing cool stuff with an OTK or AI, who might not identify as that person or night might not even be aware of and experimental non fiction or sound art and sound poetry, these different fields that are, that share all these kind
of interesting, cross sections, what are often just kind of artificially, you know, siloed. And so we want to bridge some of those gaps and we hope to provide you with audiences outside of our yellow community and vice versa.
So, one quick thing I wanted to see here was also that.
Yeah, these So thinking about the, the kind of sensorial experience of a place the psychological experience of the place, the material experience, and also the infrastructure, I think it's something that is also you know that what's going on behind the
scenes of what we can't see, when we're thinking about space is really interesting aspects of this project as well. So they really can be up to whatever kind of area you're interested in, they can be no columns or poetic pieces just kind of micro narratives
experimental spoken word perform, you know, people working in performance.
Alternative you could have a performance that lingers in a, in an intersection.
Alternative histories AI generated text scraped texts, read by synthetic voices or a yet to be classified utterance. So the key is just coming up with something that we would never expect.
And so it's super easy. The deadline is June 30 and that you don't have to have a finished, Sonic piece by that time just a proposal for the idea that you'd like to do with the location, your bio, and then don't worry if you don't have any experience
working in audio AR before that's totally no problem it's super easy to just.
All you need are a way to record the your, your text, and the locations for for where, where you want it to go.
But for the proposal. All you need to do is just send us some links to some of your work disappear previous work on, so we can get an idea about the kinds of the voice, you know your artistic voice.
So in a perfect world if I had more time I played some, some pieces by people that have been invited to participate in the novel issue, but we don't have time for that maybe in the, in the q amp a or something.
So, some final thoughts.
In addition to submitting work if you're interested in, if you, if this is exciting to you, we'd love to have you considered being on the editorial board.
If you want to suggest a guest curator, we really want this to be a global and inclusive space to work in so we'd love to partner with people that are deeply connected with different local communities that you think we have people that could pull together
some amazing pieces from across the globe. We, we have examples from France, LA and Tokyo right now as our initial kind of sampling but I really hope we get a whole bunch of great things for the initial one.
So, and look forward to speaking with you more in the q amp a, and I hope that's close to five minutes.
So, how did I do Devin.
You were pretty close. Just a little over, but it's over. Okay.
Thank you very much. I'm excited about that.
I'm is George as George Cox here, we make it here yet.
Alright, Well, skipping ahead.
Melinda Are you ready to go. Sorry.
Okay, Melinda.
I have to warn you, my brain might have been a bit reprogrammed in the art session earlier. I'll do my best. I'll try to stay with five minutes to, um, so I'm just going to give a brief outline overview of some of the platforms, and that my students have
been using in the to teach to electronic to digital creative writing courses nonfiction.
Open Education, and one electronic literature course where we use, Scott Roberts, electronic literature text at the University of New Hampshire.
And so just just kind of an overview.
I find that lower stakes technology platforms for introducing electronic literature and digital writing, kind of take the intimidation factor out a little bit for them and I found it can heighten their creative self expression, where they can focus on
topics and content and take more risks.
So to introduce them, I start when we start with video essays usually very linear, but to explore non linearity and fragmentation. We start with a map essay.
Google My Maps still very linear some of my students even number these down the side, but you can hop around in a nonlinear way, you'll see night labs story map will be able to move, move things with this sidebar, and is pretty linear, but still introduces
fragmentation and combined with visuals.
Obviously, we do place essays for these.
This one is about covert which a lot of my student essays are about this past year, as probably everyone's familiar with twine. Great.
Open source software, limited coding I'm they don't see copy and pasting as coding.
So it's a great one for starting branching narrative texts. Also, just a natural, you know, accessible easily disseminated so natural for
marginalized voices, and a lot of my students have have used it for things like that I am when I teach, kind of a little bit of the history about it.
And so this is a text my, I had an honors thesis student so this is actually fiction.
His twine piece uses second person as do many of them, but a gender neutral.
Second Person reader player character.
And that topic is about discrimination against this high school student of color and kind of these moral quandary.
It puts the reader in and kind of an ultimate like futility of moral decision making on a flawed system. in the end, has a very creepy video play like a second
to sacrifice for success. Show me your truth, free yourself of expectation and act authentically, you will be judged. Like all, there's who have entered this world before you
kind of cool I'm putting, I'll put the PDF with the links to the student projects in the chat, and the one that's up doesn't have the links to it.
Um, so I also started using thing link on the suggestion of a colleague in the art department. Last spring when we had to go online, because I kind of lost Adobe access.
So I found it's actually better than I thought for hypertext projects it's truly multimodal environment, and you can see like a blank slate, which is what I want when I teach final essays.
So they have total control the design this is an original art project basically and also a beautiful essay on nature and the environment.
We also read my body under calmer and class so I have several students who've done body type essays, and this one is about her hands and vulnerability.
Don't stare at it too long.
I'm thing links also great for 360 environments, so a little intro into.
we've also used Google Earth for some, like dipping our toes into the 360 world, your own 360 images or other peoples, and also night labs seen.
This one is panoramic but she have a 360 camera.
Kind of cool, and nightlife has a bunch of free storytelling tools.
I tried out most of them.
This semester I introduced timeline into a kind of intermediate nonfiction class as their first intro into digital writing. This one is a timeline on coven.
So it's very linear obviously it's a timeline, but we're studying memoir, so it kind of makes sense.
And it's multimodal you can put news clips and tweets and things like that. So of course there are other options. I'm had students remediate Drupal gorge.
I'm excited to use step works in the fall I went to that workshop and I love that we've been talking a lot in the sessions I went to you today about preservation, obviously and kind of HTML and JavaScript as the only safe bets really and video, so I like
that you can export it. I'm also twine is an HTML based.
Um, so I just find that students are really expressing themselves through these platforms you can read more about it.
that I go way over five minutes. Oh, not at all
those wonderful presentation and learned a lot of new little things that it tricks and so I appreciate that.
It's, George is George showed up yet. No.
Okay then, anger, are you in advance when is up next and Are you ready to go. Yeah, I think so. Thank you. You're welcome. I did not think to prepare slides for an electronic literature conference and now it occurs to me that that's weird but I thought
it's only five minutes. So my name is Yvonne event, thanks for having me here.
I'm an assistant professor at University School of Humanities and digital sciences and I'm currently mercury Fellow at UC Santa Barbara.
The title of my paper was a platform based rules of notice or unnoticed digital literature and attentional modulation. And I still think that sounds very promising to be honest but I'm afraid that the ID was a little bit underdeveloped or poorly executed
in the draft that I submitted to me now it seems that it's too long and too short at the same time so it's a bit too long to make this provocative statement that I might have had in mind, but it's also a bit too short to actually fully develop the points
that I want to be making in the future. So I'm very happy to get this chance to work very briefly elucidate the idea that I had in mind.
And so my research interest very broadly revolves around ideas of attentional modulation and how different texts and different media objects, kind of invite but also manipulate a whole range of modes of attention from deep to hyper attention, and how
this also create certain rhythms of reading and viewing and play.
And this is not particularly electronic literature project but this would be one of the cases, the cases so far have included a very traditional short stories but also DIRECT address in TV series, full motion video games, as Mr.
And also tik tok POV.
And now, electronic literature. So I understand or I try to understand these manipulations of attention as a way in which media objects themselves, kind of demonstrate an awareness of being part of an attention economy.
Now, a platform ization of media culture in general but electronic literature in particular, I think influences such attention on modes important. And yet, under research ways, important because the technological but also social afford answers and constraints
of these platforms, clearly feed into the way that these words restructure the ways we attend to them, so to speak, and under research because I feel that there is yet to be a lot to be done in developing notions of that from literacy beyond scared of
the buzzword stage. So platform studies in electronic literature, often focus more on the production side and the creation side of things.
So there was in a nutshell, the intervention I was hoping to me but also some words, leave open at this stage.
So what I do, do in my paper is I introduced this idea of rules of notice, and that was coined in the late 1887 by Peter Rabinovitch, and it refers to the way in which are those kind of structure their narrative in a hierarchical way to guide the reader's
attention towards important plot points, so certain elements are foreground is creating a heightened awareness and others are back rounded nudging the reader to process and read them in a more superficial shallow manner.
And then I go on to acknowledge that, of course, a lot has changed since the late 80s.
On the one hand, we might say that skills in our present the attention economy skills like cognitive flexibility or attention or modulation are arguably more important than ever before.
But on the other hand the rules of notice, often seem to be missing, especially when we're reading online we don't always get this very clear sense of hierarchical structuring anymore.
No one is telling us when to pay attention and when we can comfortably skim or while people are telling us but when they're telling us often this leads to kind of hermeneutics of suspicion attitude.
So we don't always know beforehand what will be important. And this creates this common feeling of being engulfed and at the same time always missing enough.
So I look at how experiences like these are connected and reflected in words of electronic literature and if anything comes to mind now I would be very happy to receive tips at the end of this.
So in the paper I just simply look at for text that display a whole range of different devices like expanding and contracting stretch text, dynamic and streaming text rapid serial visual presentation, but also all kinds of problems for close reading and
for immersive devices.
And in some cases I feel like this absence of rules of notice is really part of the procedural rhetoric of these words and words and our overall meaning.
This is for instance the case with pride by tender claws.
And in other cases deep attention and immersion are also guided and very novel ways and not so much by the narrative characteristics of the world but more by media and platform specific of ordinances, for instance in loaders an iPhone or iPad novella
by news is hope, the Dutch author that offers an immersive experience to a color using white noise, using animation and since skates, as the author calls them, or broken time charity how escape with those who love life it was also referenced in Melinda's
paper, which combines sexual fluidity with very explicit prompts very explicit invitations to start close reading.
So, as said I didn't try to also account for how the specific of ordinances and constraints of twine or Adobe Flash would feed into the way in which these words, manipulate our attention.
And that is how far I've gotten with this final.
Thank you.
Um, okay so let's, let's make some time for some questions so if George has not arrived, so I think george will never arrive.
But, yeah, so go ahead and
If you have questions, let's hear them. I kind of have a question for the whole group but mostly for England I was thinking a lot about closure and the idea of cognitive patients that you talked about.
And how do we get our students to find that right I've had students say that they read half a passage in my body and they clicked on something else so they're distracted.
But I've also had them say like the interactivity keeps them engaged and so they would rather do that then read a print text.
But I also like stop watching some of the young hating Heavy Industries, because I think there may be infinite.
But then I can stay on a whole video essay. So,
or I can read and reread afternoon.
I don't, I wanted to also yeah tack on to Mel's.
Comment Question two is, and other people in this room could talk about their different reading strategies I guess you know is, you know, the desire to read something completely or to speed through things I mean this is also an issue with gaming is how,
you know, how important is it to know every nook and cranny of a game that you enjoy versus finishing it quickly and completely in gaining a sense of it.
I don't know if other people.
Also, you know, might have some thing to add to this conversation, it's an important one.
to know I think it also kind of depends on the meaning of the word what the word wants to say because these experiences of being frustrated in your life hermeneutics activities or goals can also be very informative in another sense if that is the like
the pry novella thing that is what it wants to bring across that you, you need this feeling of being almost illiterate or not knowing what is going on for the work to be successful.
And then your closure I think it's very interesting because the narrative everything is about closure. And I feel like in some ways we're also kind of bored with that and moving beyond closure in a very traditional sense and maybe also even students,
but then you have other boundaries within as well so it doesn't have to be the traditional rounded of narratives to have certain event boundaries it at least structure the experience and I'm also interested in individual differences in this in this like
with me when I discuss this kind of text with students like what the one finds boring the other finds an enormous challenge and that's also interesting, which are great question.
I found I taught prior, a couple times in in my English in a live class he led class, and it was always very successful. I had to give it up because not enough students that iOS devices.
And I found that that was one constraint I wasn't prepared to deal with I would scout around for iPads, that could play it and just give them out. But I couldn't couldn't do it.
In the end, and the students were one more frustrated, but I found that was, they loved Actually, it was a gaming sensibility that they had more than I had that allowed them to to fall into especially the chapter where you had to unfold.
The, the text and the text kept on changing that that blew them away it was really successful.
Marty I see your hand is raised. Thank you, Devin.
I'm very interesting discussions and Melinda white it's really good to see you. I remember you from a long time back and, and I'm happy to have you here and thank you for this present presentation, you know I'm thinking here about the issue of engagement,
and eager to hear of course how students are engaging. Oh my god, there goes my yard lower people.
So, but, but I wanted to say this, you know, electronic literature might have been seen to have matured into some kind of mainstream in 25 or 30 years.
But, but I think that that what we're seeing is that experimental literature continues to be experimental, no matter how long you do it so the things that were experimental in.
In the early 20th century if we take something like the Sound and the Fury, I would teaching literature I would still find students who couldn't quite get what was happening with Benji.
And the fact that they were going to be these four different voices.
And the same thing with much, much of the experimental literature that I would teach in print.
And of course, electronic literature is not only experimental experimental in so many ways that students are even though they're savvy about the mainstream applications.
Most of the most of the really good pieces that we have. Take our regular expectations and ask us to do some kind of other imagining, and I'm just, I'm so pleased to see the people that are working with.
I'll have to go now it's going to be too noisy by
Jeremy has a question in the chats, and he asked to Andrew, how is the sense of space and sound first driven your proposal and involved in the process, thus far.
Okay.
Thanks. Jeremy that's, that's an interesting question. I, you know, at the Orlando.
Yellow conference last year I did a, I had a presentation I was trying to look for the link to it to plug in there. I did a sonic monument on the records campus not too far from where Andrew works across the street, and it says a.
It's a kind of
experimental non fiction piece in a way where you hear it's using an archive of interviews of the from the black organization of students, it was something that we did collaboratively with a bunch of graduate students in some upper level undergrads, and
and it was a it was an amazing project and we excerpted these, you know like nine cubic meters of cassette tapes, and we listened to them and use different Python scripts to kind of pull over these texts and then pulled out these interesting kind of ways
of categorizing and thinking about the the differences between the perspectives within this group that was a hugely influential group there really transformed New Jersey's higher education from that from 1969 to like, and then by 30 years later the school
is one of the most diverse schools in the country.
Long story short, so it is true that through experimenting with that project that really started to make me think about what this was really.
I loved listening to it, and listening to the voices and seeing the architecture. It was almost like wherever you were became a movie, and in what without the screen like your existence was the screen.
And it was amazing and I thought it's such a rich area for people to work with, and I started to get excited about the possibility so that was like the one of the germs and I know you've been in this field for a long time and can maybe recommend other
you know pieces that, that if we had more time as a complete panel, I would say Jeremy was going to do a thing about the history of locations or contexts of location of sound and text and in space and quickly.
I had some questions for the rest of the panel, but I'll hold off.
Go ahead and ask Andrew.
I saw that Scott, or like Scott's one of one of version of Scott which is here and I and I saw that in
the, the first in the in Melinda's
presentation she was referring to Scott's book and I thought it'd be really interesting you know the, what you're kind of doing Melinda is is kind of putting together.
Kind of a set of tools for ways of actively engaging with the ideas that are in Scott's book and I thought it might be really interesting to have like a, you know like, like the creator version, you know, in the field of like new media where, you know,
I kind of come from you like you have these there's like the theory and the practice book, you know any mean and so I thought it would be kind of cool to have a you know tools for the practice part of that and to develop like exercises based on chapters
or something. I don't know if other people have thoughts on that or I've been trying to figure out why it was so exciting to me.
A Melinda's presentation just to see sort of taking the concepts and actually using them, especially with, you know, using accessible tools that students could get hooks into very quickly so I'm really, I'm delighted to see that.
Yeah. And certainly, I mean, the only way that I think we sort of do this right now is with the bounce of knowledge base where you know the the references from Melinda's talk will will cross reference on the, on, you know, the book side, and people be
able to access it that way. But yeah it's it's been it's been really cool to see the different approaches that people are taking to both some things that people that are described within the book but but that also just take the concepts into, you know,
new uses of the technology. Now, you know, four or five years on. So, so thanks a lot, Melinda, really, really great to see those sent out. I'll be thinking about some of those my teaching as well.
Thank you. It's a great, it's a great book obviously I'm actually in the elite class I do weekly play assignments, where we just play with each genre that we're reading about.
So we do a little practice generative things and we make collages and stuff like that, so it's been really fun.
I want to take that class it sounds so fun.
This question is, I think primarily for Andrew but I'm starting to see threads that connect. I, as someone who has tried to do audio pieces starting in one location and walking to another I was super excited about the the feature of Jessica with that
on the website that will use machine learning to predict like the length of the walk, or prepare like a voiceover to help like kind of have dummy text to work with to start vaping, you know tools for the creators.
And I'm curious what your experience has been working with these tools or how its shaped.
If you're the people that have been making have talked about how it's changed the practice of making lucrative media. And I guess this for Melinda to like how do students talk about how it's changed their writing to have to kind of write into a form,
because I think that something like a lucrative piece where you have this very this constraint of its site specific or it has to be from this end of the block to this end of the block.
You know I'm right with there with you, Jeremy is very like very close to my heart, um, you know, and I think that for Inca to it's like, I started thinking about like well how do I write for reader who's got like I do 200 tabs open right now and this
between them like how do I write fragmented text or right into a text box in a form field so I guess I'm thinking about that relationship of forming content and how are your creators responding to that relationship now that the form is changing
woman did you want to take that one first and then all by myself time to think of something smart to say.
And they seem to be loosen up a little and they go right, they start kind of tied to linearity and they really like the map essay because it's like the first time they've done anything like that where they can put in images, but it's also very, the mat
the themes get more loose as we go on to so that is a place or travel essay, which just makes sense.
So I think they like the constraints and the, oh I get to had a place or I can write about a road trip or one girl is semester wrote about different paths, like she's taken like a walk to school when she was little and then a hike or, and it was all like,
really cool lines.
I think they like having a form they don't really have to worry about too much of the visual design, at first, but they can play with.
Lexi is and and fragments and maybe make it a little nonlinear, they often want like a conclusion, you know.
So, but then they get to play with design or when they get to twine, or thing link.
And then that's a lot of freedom, and some of them panic little, but it's good for them.
So, my thoughts on your, your question Sarah, or.
I've been really kind of thinking it as far as, you know, working with the Jessica folks to try to understand, you know what if someone wants it to be read you know something when people are walking this way in something else when people are going this
other way, you know like, what are the things, what can we break can fix it you know and what is this is just has how it has to be so I think there's a because I come from the like the art school of doing everything yourself and making the thing you want
to see.
But that's, I also know the downside of that which is like things take three years and you know by the time you finish it, you can't stand it.
The, the, the thing that with Jessica was, it's really kind of meant to, maybe, to some degree limit, every possible way you could do something, if you have that urge you might just need to code it yourself but hopefully sometimes within the constraints
system, it can generate some creativity that is fun and unexpected and I think that's more along the lines of what we're, we're aiming for is to make this kind of super easy threshold of how you can participate in this.
It's really about getting voices that I just that will stun you that, you know, and you're like oh my god that's that's really a genius idea that approach I would never have come up with that and those are the kinds of things that we're hoping to see
getting a diverse set of set of approaches so I'm hoping that I'm just trying to understand how the software is used. So I can communicate it clearly to anyone that has some kind of like something that's slightly outside of what the website says, The,
the other kind of part of that is.
I forgot the other part two of my, my thought sir but I'm a big fan of your work just as a side note, I've gotten serious to see what you're, what you're working on.
But if it comes to me all added in. Absolutely same I owe you an email from like, four yellows.
Yeah.
Sorry I was going to call on and she's been waiting with their hand up. Sorry. That's okay.
No problem at all. I'm enjoying this question, but I probably asked the question that will be maybe a bit uncomfortable. And it comes from the fact that my students made me uncomfortable so my question is basically to Melinda and to those of you who would
like to share their experience with teaching students. So, do you have any tools for the students who are less than enthusiastic, to put it mildly, or even outright skeptical about electronic literature because you know if it was only me, then I would
thought maybe I would have thought maybe it's my lack of skills you know or not enough to that. But this semester I invited money, besides ski and Mark Marino, and Rob with from a class on electronic literature.
Actually the class is traditional literary studies on students so maybe that also is a problem. But anyway, you most of you probably know Mark and Rob and the way they teach net broke right.
So, my students were like, Nah, this is not the real literature. It's not the real stuff. Where's the literature in it. You know, these kind of questions so so that that's where my question comes from, and I'm, and the discussion with marriage Pisarski
who is who designed the really successful Polish collaborative novel was even more interesting because the students started attacking him even know where is the real stuff in here.
This is not good retoucher right. So after like 30 minutes of this discussion.
We've noticed with knowledge that actually the students may may have a point, you know.
And actually, I think I'm, I'm steering towards the question about the generation change. Do not is some changes, you know, within the last several years when it comes to how students see what the electronic reader is what it can offer, and like I said
in the beginning, do we have any tools to teach their reluctance students in the class.
the one that's not enchanted with electronic literature at all It doesn't even see what's the point in putting it, you know, so to speak.
I can go.
And I am skeptics every semester, my intro class fulfills a Fine and Performing Arts requirement so I don't even have English majors in my class.
But I kind of ease them into it, like, we start with print text, and express stick essays.
We go to the art museum and talk about art and the visual rhetoric, and then we do a video essay, and then we go to maps and hypertext. I feel like I kind of ease them into it and at the beginning I sneak some I start sneaking the email it into the map
section and the drastic section. And at the end we're looking at things like the bafflement fires and they're like, whoa.
Um, but this semester we did like in the New River journal the infinite worries bash, I think that's what it's called, and moto IO which is a mobile collaborative piece and they really like the kind of collaborative voices around, stress,
things like that that were I tried to make it really relevant to the pandemic things.
And obviously, anyone who teaches knows this past year has been really stressful for students say think they kind of have fun with it I get I get a mix up like this is crazy and this is really fun, right, and they've never, a lot of them have never made
anything like this too so they're exploring my more advanced class this semester was mostly journalism majors and, and they were pretty skeptical too but I just kind of said like how these tools like timeline and things can be used for literary journalism
and.
Yeah,
I know. Sorry.
I sorry, I just, there is Jennifer makes a nice comment and question in the chats and it says she asked Do students of print, literature, even experimental literature, have a specific sense of attention modulation driven by an assumed subconscious sense
of rules of notice that they have absorbed over time and I'm wondering if Jennifer you could you could elaborate on that or if if Inga or Melinda might want to, or any of our, our guests might want to speak to that comment because I think it's a good
one. Sure, I can try I'm sorry my camera's not on. Um, I guess I wonder if just going back to what you just said about the sense of,
sorry, let me just look back at my own question
about the rules of notice that traditional literature students have been picking up those cues and if they were literature students they're good at it.
And if they're coming into a literature.
For the first time, they're really greeted by a set of procedures and maybe even an absence of roles of notice as it was talking about.
That would suggest even aesthetically that this is not literature, and I can say from my own intro to what class. We had a big fight for example over how to rob a bank.
I don't know if people know that it's about a guy who Google's.
How to rob the bank on his phone, which in a very meta way kind of suggested this to me that here's somebody in sense he doesn't have much of an attention span he's you know googling things every, every bit of the way.
So there isn't a kind of set of rules of notice it's shifted.
So we did have those arguments, and I guess that is my question or my speculation. And I hope that's clear.
Yeah, thank you so much for this suggestion I think that makes a lot of sense actually I'm thinking back on my own experiences with teaching. And I think I'm now almost on the other end of the divide because I used to teach at a more traditional literary
studies department, and now I'm at an online culture department, and most students really prefer doing research on Instagram and YouTube and, and if you give them electronic literature as opposed to a traditional novel or short story I think they get
kind of excited and relieved like okay it's literature, but it's still, it's still playful, you can still do stuff with it. And the same with Instagram poetry for instance they kind of like felt so much more alive when we started to discuss that because
it's still it has layers, there is still more to analyze and discover than meets the eye. But it doesn't feel so oh my god, they're going to tell me what is important now this is clearly a metaphor for something and now I have to maybe look it up or like,
so I think it's definitely uncultured and trained in a way.
Yeah.
And now I'm wondering about new kinds of objects like what the sticks out do with this for instance all the all the all these other possibilities.
Um, if I if I could interject I think because it's kind of come up a few times in in this session.
You know one of the things I think is that question of, for me, I think about sort of the impact that semiotics has had on our understanding of literature right that there's this process of, like, decoding something that's dramatically constructed.
And yes of course like grammar is a huge part of language and and the sort of instruction in grammar is a huge motivation for the teaching of literature, but you know there's this whole other area of sort of literary practice that is, is symbolic or,
you know, as representational, but not in a, you know, in the way that semiotics is you know i mean we could think maybe look more mimetic practices, you know these kinds of ad hoc sort of gestural moments of of language that I think are actually quite
manifest in a lot of works of electronic literature like I think of like what Judd Morrissey does, you know, for instance, you know how to make sense of that through some kind of rigid, you know, structured decoding practice, you know is, is offensive
i think but then it's also then maybe it's offensive to treat any work, purely, you know, like it's something that can be decoded and I think that's what a lot of literary criticism, you know, is, is focused on.
I mean, just to comment. I think it's runs through a lot of these
comments that I've seen here and I think I saw somebody hand go up, if you could hand went up somebody can unmute.
Yeah, okay.
I would like to ask something to the discussion and especially toward honor sad because I know this story from current from from from Mario's Tikka the University of foods and I'm also co author of creative writing studies program.
And in the new version of this program we put
great accent of on electronic literature, and transmedia writing so I'm mostly literary based, and I had a lot of experience speaking with print literary students about electronic literature, and of course there are always some tactics fault.
But what I discovered they are really accustomed to talking about kind of narrative about
construction of the protagonist about very classical concept of literature, and we can adapt that talking about electronic literature, and when I start with that.
It had a lot. Those students.
Instead of speaking about electronic poetry starting with coding you can just explain how to expand the category of metaphor.
Instead of speaking about located narratives.
Just starting with coding, or even Google Maps, you can start with the history of using maps in literature and going step by step I'm also mostly based in material, which is rare I mean, The next one or two realities.
I mean, the realities. So we also put a specific order in our creative writing classes, we start with analog transmit transmedia literature, every kind of visual literature, and then after that, we go to the electronic one.
So, and I really found it's, it's really hard for. But of course, there are students which really say, I don't like it. I'm very excited because we are planning, the course with VR and AR next semester, and our students, which said no we don't want that.
But it was only one person this year so it's it's better, so it was will be kind of my advice would be to do.
But I didn't know it. If it's a little hard for.
I had a something I wanted to, to ask about attention, and
your your your paper. And this is term called the content collapse. I don't know if you're familiar with it I'm sure some of the folks set, I forget if it's like Captain Davidson it's one of the people that that have been, I'm sure if you just Google
content collapse. It'll come up the authors me, but it is this idea how, like in your Facebook school or Instagram you just go from, like, something about the Palestinian, you know, suffering to like someone talking about the child's birthday to somewhat
you know any mean it is just, there's no context, between one thing and the next kind of is the kind of basic idea. And I'm wondering you like, are, are these, you know the conditions set by the behaviors kind of set up from social media influencing these,
the kind of thing that you're talking about in your attention, kind of focus and maybe that could be something to bring into your, your research.
Yeah, thank you. I was thinking something similar with a question before that I had no answer to about from the artistic side like how would you cater to someone who has opened all the other tabs and you know that you are just being just just making up
little window or one tap in someone's media feed or whatever or on someone's interface at the moment. And I don't know what to do with it I think it would be far more interesting if I would develop some kind of theory that accounts for that and maybe also been writing about art or literature because I have a feeling that most
creators, not really have that sense and that they do, ideally want your full attention with everything they do.
In a sense, and I was writing about as Mr before because I find it so fascinating. This was a paper about Islam our girlfriends and these are women who pretend to be your partner there's also men but it's a bit different.
And they pretend especially in covert times to kind of calm their viewers by pretending to be their partner and everything about their journey is so much focused on I'm going to have your full attention now and it's not really possible to look at different
types at the same time so I wonder if there are examples and literature like that like new. And I mentioned the more like immersive reading experience where everything from the outside world is kind of blocked and the soundscape is created, which for
me worked really well to be honest it was really like being completely gone for a while and they've been underwater reading. So I wonder about different strategies or maybe doing the opposite and having like a hype immediate answer to that and accounting
for the fact that you are literally one little, little window a little thing.
So yeah, that's not an answer at all but
I guess I'm just looking for interesting and kind of radical answers to this from the artistic side as well.
as follow up, just quickly.
What you just said, Well, what.
Wait a minute, who's just said it about scrolling and social media that again reminds me that in a way, if you have a work of evil it demands some serious scrolling pay attention to it.
But the sort of attention modulation that's out there on social media says don't pay attention to it, just keep scrolling. So I wonder if there is. And I don't want to hammer this point but I wonder if there's a kind of aesthetic clash there, where the
students in a sense can't read a serious piece as serious, because the way that their attention has been trained and directed, particularly through some forms of social media says if you're hopping around you're kind of not serious I'm not demanding your
full attention. Open up all the tabs and bounce between them and then if there's a quote unquote serious work that says, open up all the tabs and bounce between them and pay total attention to everything I'm doing here.
There's, there's a conflict of aesthetic, or even procedural rules.
You know I thinking about that, like, and this is a comment, I'm sure many other people have made it but I've heard, like Rob wedding is has made this pointed this out is that, you know, we also live in a time of binge watching where like our students
have no trouble watching like 12 hours of something like, without any kind of break or interruption in in a very focused way and sometimes even watching and re watching favorite shows.
And I think you know that this ingredient is, you know, desire is you know this huge part of it, and that's the one, like how do you you sucker someone in, you know, how does that seduction work with a work of literature in any in any context, you know.
Yeah, in a way, it's like, it's, it's a kind of third book to our discussion of like the creative coding book that that runs parallel to Scotts it's like the the examples of artwork that I get well he's got plenty actually in there right now but I think
it's having these ones that have things that have worked well in each of our classes that that bringing people in that some people in.
That's also, I think, a valuable resource to share, you know, I'm seeing some good suggestions in the chat.
I don't know if I'm if Margie or Stephanie might talk a little bit about. I mean, some of the some of our discussions that made me think about the extent to which distraction has to be considered in any work of a lead, and or has been traditionally and
if that if that is, you know, if they see any changes happening over time. In terms of. I mean I think particularly of Stewart mouth drops work as being so focused on distraction and the impossibility of attending to the various threads, not just in the
code but even since orally in a, in a multimedia art piece.
You know if it's definitely on she might want to respond but if not, Atlanta I would like to, um, you know, this question as we're discussing it is, is perpetual, and I guess the question might be.
Is it is it worse now than it was at the beginning because we, We, many of the practitioners. Early on were very aware of the fact that the tendency in reading, both in print and the much much much more so as the web became a dominant reading place.
The tendency was to want things to go faster. I think we became so aware of this you know by the turn of the century, that people had at that time, less intent in staying on a particular piece of text for any period of time.
You could even tell that in our early conferences and I used to watch it because there were works that would be shown that it would have a page of text on the screen Johanna and and you would see people start looking away almost after the fourth or fifth
word that they weren't going to read it through that they were going to hope that they could catch whatever was going on some other way. And when I wrote Columbia.
I actually knew that when, when I was looking at something like 300 screens and probably 500 words of work that very few people would look at it all the way through.
and watch the progress, and they had learned very quickly to skip to the music they liked and and and just go to the places they wanted to go to but you go anywhere in Colombia, in a keystroke or two, and then they looked at the new parts.
I'm Kate Hales has written a lot about deep attention and, and various reading styles. Now the question is for me. When we think about the pandemic and people binge watching as with just mentioned.
What is the difference in the kind of attention. That might be required, let's say, to look at a piece that requires that deep attention, as opposed to looking at something which is entirely linear and self controlled such as a string of TV sitcoms, which
are very repetitive and almost hypnotic in their pattern repetition. So, I think we've always been aware of the fact that there are going to be various classes of readers and that's why I started out by mentioning that experimental experimental literature,
always requires a different kind of attention from let's say reading.
A typical romance novel, well written and entertaining and so forth but following what we call a genre, better.
Um, I don't think that
blessedly enough. I don't think that he lit has gotten into a place where we have excluded. Any of those reading speeds and attention levels, some of the work requires a terrible amount of attention, and some of the work really is perfectly entertaining
on its own. So I think that I think that we could embrace the fact that students will vary in how they approach our works, and that they end that they have a perfect right to do so.
And that we have a perfect right to offer them a real variety.
And I'd say, well in the first place. I wrote poetry, which is completely different than the way you approach it then. All this narrative.
The way the way different narrative lines are chosen.
I also always refer for almost everything I wrote. There were books sometimes two books on the same material as well as various digital implementations.
And what was interesting to me was what could happen in each of those and what each of those was doing better than the other.
But, for instance, One way that certain things were changed was when, when I first did the universe which was the sky full of these things that look like constellations was spontaneously read his constellations.
The people could reveal them by their own movement, there's a lot of touch.
Hovering sort of touch that reveals layers of things.
People would say to me, or what a good way to organize information I mean they didn't necessarily associated with a, you know, artistic work say, and, but always within that you could read it by number or you could read it by shape there was I always
had several ways of going into it. So, when now the text for that when I was first written it was written in one long set of scrolling corsets but that was so unacceptable in print at the time that they were made into what I call wave sonnets which didn't
exactly end and punctuation they would flow through, but later in a second edition.
When I also made a new digital edition. I returned it is to the wave of curses because people were so used to scrolling by that time online that whole thing could scroll forever again bother anybody anymore, because they weren't tied to print.
But when we made the iPad version of the universe.
People could draw their own constellations, and we had
an Oracle, we had different things that were more in tune with what people at that moment we're doing, even though it was very much the same.
Certainly recognizably the same piece and there's all together about six different instantiate versions of this space. And each one of them does the one thing better than the other.
And I, so I, to me that's one of the main things about the literature, really, is that it really honors the fact that people come from different languages, different neural organizations or whatever, and so it's possible to find something that resonates
with you, and it's not our goal, have everybody read something in the same way, it's not met Michael anyway.
I love that.
I love that comment Stephanie IAI Siobhan and Talia have been waiting very patiently to ask questions I don't want to cut you yeah either of you off so Stephen, do you want to.
Sure. Hi, thank you everybody.
Um, and this is this is such an interesting conversation to be, you know, sort of immersed in because I have a digital text class coming up in six weeks and thinking about what I'm going to be doing and playing with, and I think, I think, going back to
some of the comments around how interactivity changes and changes the relationship with the text.
Something that I start my classes but the digital text in the video games class which is in English department. I have them play queries in love with the end of the world.
First, that's the first thing that they encounter. And then we talk about it in terms of the limits of sort of literary theory the limits of what we can talk about as an interactive text, when you have the inclusion of a timer so that we have to talk
about the game Enos of that text and the game mechanic, and that then starts opening up the discussion that runs through the entire course around intention, and the cues to intention what the what the, you know, sort of the he lit, or the story game intention
is in its relationship with you as the reader or the player, and how you craft that and so like a touch point for that which is really useful in the video games course is like The Stanley Parable where you are being spoken to in the game and manipulated
in the game. And then, you know, where students take that understanding is like sort of really extraordinary because they start thinking about the interactive text then whether it's, it is like story or memoir, or, you know, sort of getting into kind
of critical territory in terms of addressing documentary topics and things are crafted with an eye to that relationship and and that is like this distinctive component in that space for them.
So, I have not just like drop it into chat because this is open on the web. But let me go up here.
This, this twine story game was, you know, the first digital work that the student had created this was the first thing ever and it's extraordinarily beautiful and concise and emotional and well crafted in terms of how it kind of modulates different moments
and the kind of the aesthetics of the piece. So to me that you know the sort of the many points in here that are worth much deeper thought kind of prison for me around this question of, of, signaling the intention of the work in terms of how it is positioning
you. And because this is you know books don't require us to do like in all of the things that but just do books are thoroughly naturalized artifacts we know what to do with them.
Whereas, we land on a screen, and we have to figure it out. So that's where we also talked an awful lot about mental models and how the mental models that we bring to it, the gamer see one thing that straight let students see something else so we have
those conversations as to how people are seeing differently and how their responses are being huge differently because of them the mental models that they're working with.
Thank you. Sharon Telia.
Hi, can you hear me.
Yes. Awesome. Alright so this has been a very interesting conversation for me because all of you, it seems like many of your professors and I just finished my first year of undergrad.
So, I've been thinking about, um, I wanted to focus mostly on people's comments on social media and also, like, like, to the two ends of the spectrum for, like, my generation in terms of attention, their social media and then we have been watching 12
hours of whatever show just got released on Netflix, and the comments that were made on intentionality, like the signaling what amount of attention, you're supposed to pay.
I think that's something that is that a lot of my generation have trouble with because we hook into social media we do scroll Twitter or Instagram or Reddit, because it feels like a necessity and then we spread our attention to sin.
So we almost have to try and distance ourselves from the content we're consuming otherwise would hit us like too far too fast. Like, and, but when we, but when we want to escape ourselves, and the stress that were put, like, under in our lives.
That's when you have a lot of people go, binge watch, or like read 300 k A fanfic in like five hours, things like that. And I thought of two particular
pieces of Isla that I think like broke the like that like shocked people out of their like strict like default, I'm just going to scroll social media like state on I someone mentioned careers at in love at the end of the world was really attention grabbing
for a lot of the seniors and juniors in my class because it's so it's so thoroughly.
Like twisted our expectations. Like, like, like caught her attention and, like, but we didn't have the time to explore everything that was going on. And I think that was something that a lot of people, I haven't heard mentioned yet is that were used to
to having, like, like being able to control everything, have the choice on what to consume and under what circumstances, most, most people like we don't have DVR is anymore we do not, we don't have, we can watch anything anytime we want.
So, but there's also Nick Monfort recent work, the bug, which is based on the metamorphosis like I clicked on it and it was visceral and intense.
Um, but like I think a lot of students my age like we just we're so desensitized to everything.
And something has to shock this out of that or we have to make the choice to immerse all of ourselves into something, or it's just not going to work. We're not going to be receptive, because like, if we if we were, we paid attention to everything all
the time. Like, it would really hurt us like we can't do that, we're there's there's too much news too much, too much of everything.
So that's what I wanted to say.
I will I will probably talk to my professor, my elect Professor about what I heard from this conference tomorrow. So thank you very much.
Thanks, and that's I mean, it's got me thinking about something that I might one of my sons is been off for over a year now, he's been taking the Sam Raimi Spider Man movie, and making a line, a lot of mean every day from every single word every single
line of that movie.
And it's bananas way to do a very close reading of a film to mean the entire film, but it just a different you know what gets what attracts somebody to do something like that, I don't know.
But it's the attention is there, you know,
I don't know if anybody has a closing comment I really want to thank our panelists for, for, for your presentations this was lovely and I wish we had another half hour to go.
But I want to thank everyone so you could unmute and give them a round of applause and I think we know how to get each other so I encourage you to read the papers, and also liked as tell you about that.
She's expressing in this danger really informational danger of being assaulted, you know in a certain way by the thing and I believe that we really should be a lot more attention to that and I'd like to hear much more from her about that.
Some, some point will be in the cast, I will be in the cafe anyone wants to ask me questions after the panel.
Alas, I will not have another appointment. But, no, I please write something send it publish it, let us know.
Bye. Thank you. Bye.